Vecinis/how_to/2-Basics.md, before:

# 2: The Basics

This wouldn't be much of a book on Vecinis if I never taught you any, now, would it?

## In this chapter:
* Some conversational phrases
* Ergativity and Animacy
* Basic sentence structure
* Vecinis Names

## Vocabulary
|Term|Part of Speech|Definition|
|:---:|:---:|---|
|apfer|An. noun|Apple
|ar̂o|Adjective|Hello!
|av|Verb|To be
|ci|Verb|To see
|d'isti|Noun|This
|du'asti|Noun|That
|dzir̂o|In. noun|Pen
|ezu|Verb|To want
|gor̂a|Verb|To walk
|kirrim|Adjective|Cold
|kon|Verb|To eat
|niemoz|An. noun|Name
|Peq|An. noun|You (informal)
|qoj|An. Noun|What? (animate)
|Râ|An. noun|I, me
|Stanik|In. noun|Strannic (the language)
|tabjo|In. noun|Table
|teik|Adjective|Able to
|Tu|An. noun|You (formal)
|Tu|Preposition|Marks the next noun as possesive
|Tu|Verb|To have
|zmoxi|Verb|To like

Here are a few useful conversational phrases. (We'll worry about the grammar and such later.)

|Phrase|Strannic|
|---|---|
|Ar̂o!|Hello!
|*Person* Ar̂ov̗!|Hello, *person*!
|T'R̂ak̗ niemozs̗̄ av *name*.|My name is *name*.
|T'Uk̗ niemozs̗̄ av qoj?|What is your name?
|Râk̗ zmoxi d'isti.|I like this.
|Râk̗ anzmoxi du'asti.|I don't like that.
|Râk̗ anteiki̗ kâv Veciniss̗̄|I can't speak Vecinis.
|Tuk̗ j'avi̗ teiki̗ kâv Stanikz̗?|Can you speak Strannic?

## Ergativity
In order to explain what ergativity is, I'm going to first explain what it isn't. (You'll see.)

In Strannic and most other languages, nouns can have different forms based on whether they are the subject or the object of the sentence. For example, look at the following sentences:

* I walk.
* I see her.
* She sees me.

Notice in the first two sentences, "I" is in one form, but in the third sentence, "I" becomes "me." This is because in the first two sentences, "I" is the subject, but in the last one, it is the object. Similarly, in the second sentence, "she" is the object and so becomes "her", but in the third sentence, "she" is the subject and doesn't change. This system is known as nominative-accusative (but you don't need to know that).

Now, let's look at the same sentences in Vecinis:

* Râs̗̄ gor̂a. (I walk.)
* Râk̗ ci Anis̗̄. (I see her.)
* Anik̗ ci Râs̗̄. (She sees me.)

In the first and third sentences, "Râ-" (I) has the -s̗̄ ending, marking it as **absolutive**, but in the second sentence, it has the -k̗ ending, marking it as **ergative**. This is because whichever noun is *experiencing* something is marked with absolutive (I am *experiencing* the walking in the first sentence and she is *experiencing* the seeing in the second sentence) and whichever noun is *doing* something is marked with ergative (I am *doing* the seeing in the second sentence and she is *doing* the seeing in the third sentence).

All nouns are required to have this suffix marking it for ergativity and animacy (see below). You'll learn more about it once you learn about animacy.

In summary:
* When a sentence only has a subject, use **absolutive**
* When a sentence has a subject and an object, the subject is **ergative** and the object is **absolutive**.

Yes, this is very confusing. Don't worry; as you learn more Vecinis, you'll get used to it.

## Animacy
As if ergativity wasn't enough, Vecinis also distinguishes nouns based on **animacy**, or how alive something is. Nouns are usually only animate or inanimate, but some nouns change meanings depending on whether they are treated animately or inanimately.

> This is similar to gender systems like they have in Spanish, Arabic, and a lot of other languages. 

A noun's animacy affects the ergativity suffixes mentioned above, as well as verb conjugations.

In vocabulary lists, animate nouns are listed as **An. Noun** and inanimate nouns are listed as **In. Noun**.

## Those Pesky Suffixes
As you might have noticed, those suffixes have a little tick mark underneath them. This is to remind you that they change their pronunciation depending on what comes before them. Don't worry, it's not too bad:

Suffix|Purpose|After Vowel|After Consonant|After itself
|---|---|---|---|---
|-k̗|Animate Ergative|Vk̗ -> Vk|Ck̗ -> Cik|kk̗ -> k
|-s̗̄|Animate Absolutive|Vs̗̄ -> Vsh|Cs̗̄ -> Cish|s̄s̗̄ -> sh
|-q̗|Inanimate Ergative|Vq̗ -> Vg|Cq̗ -> Coq|qq̗ -> q
|-z̗|Inanimate Absolutive|Vz̗ -> Vz|Cz̗ -> Cuhz|zz̗ -> z

Note that these are not the only suffixes with little tick marks. You'll learn about the others later.

Here's some example sentences. Don't worry about why they mean what they mean right now, but see if you can pick out those suffixes.

* Râs̗̄ kirrimv̗. (I'm cold.)
* Dux dzir̂oq̗ sti dux tabjoz̗. (The pen is at/on the table.)
* Tuk̗ ansivjeri̗ kon pisti apfers̗̄. (You shouldn't eat this apple.)

We'll assemble all these little bits into sentences in the next chapter. For now, look back at those commonly used phrases at the beginning of the page and see if you can start to recognize the suffixes.

|[Previous Chapter: Pronunciation](1-Pronunciation.md)|
|---|

Commit message:

Add bit about Vecinik names

Vecinis/how_to/2-Basics.md, after:

# 2: The Basics

This wouldn't be much of a book on Vecinis if I never taught you any, now, would it?

## In this chapter:
* Some conversational phrases
* Ergativity and Animacy
* Basic sentence structure
* Vecinis Names

## Vocabulary
|Term|Part of Speech|Definition|
|:---:|:---:|---|
|apfer|An. noun|Apple
|ar̂o|Adjective|Hello!
|av|Verb|To be
|ci|Verb|To see
|d'isti|Noun|This
|du'asti|Noun|That
|dzir̂o|In. noun|Pen
|ezu|Verb|To want
|gor̂a|Verb|To walk
|kirrim|Adjective|Cold
|kon|Verb|To eat
|niemoz|An. noun|Name
|Peq|An. noun|You (informal)
|qoj|An. Noun|What? (animate)
|Râ|An. noun|I, me
|Stanik|In. noun|Strannic (the language)
|tabjo|In. noun|Table
|teik|Adjective|Able to
|Tu|An. noun|You (formal)
|Tu|Preposition|Marks the next noun as possesive
|Tu|Verb|To have
|zmoxi|Verb|To like

Here are a few useful conversational phrases. (We'll worry about the grammar and such later.)

|Phrase|Strannic|
|---|---|
|Ar̂o!|Hello!
|*Person* Ar̂ov̗!|Hello, *person*!
|T'R̂ak̗ niemozs̗̄ av *name*.|My name is *name*.
|T'Uk̗ niemozs̗̄ av qoj?|What is your name?
|Râk̗ zmoxi d'isti.|I like this.
|Râk̗ anzmoxi du'asti.|I don't like that.
|Râk̗ anteiki̗ kâv Veciniss̗̄|I can't speak Vecinis.
|Tuk̗ j'avi̗ teiki̗ kâv Stanikz̗?|Can you speak Strannic?

## Ergativity
In order to explain what ergativity is, I'm going to first explain what it isn't. (You'll see.)

In Strannic and most other languages, nouns can have different forms based on whether they are the subject or the object of the sentence. For example, look at the following sentences:

* I walk.
* I see her.
* She sees me.

Notice in the first two sentences, "I" is in one form, but in the third sentence, "I" becomes "me." This is because in the first two sentences, "I" is the subject, but in the last one, it is the object. Similarly, in the second sentence, "she" is the object and so becomes "her", but in the third sentence, "she" is the subject and doesn't change. This system is known as nominative-accusative (but you don't need to know that).

Now, let's look at the same sentences in Vecinis:

* Râs̗̄ gor̂a. (I walk.)
* Râk̗ ci Anis̗̄. (I see her.)
* Anik̗ ci Râs̗̄. (She sees me.)

In the first and third sentences, "Râ-" (I) has the -s̗̄ ending, marking it as **absolutive**, but in the second sentence, it has the -k̗ ending, marking it as **ergative**. This is because whichever noun is *experiencing* something is marked with absolutive (I am *experiencing* the walking in the first sentence and she is *experiencing* the seeing in the second sentence) and whichever noun is *doing* something is marked with ergative (I am *doing* the seeing in the second sentence and she is *doing* the seeing in the third sentence).

All nouns are required to have this suffix marking it for ergativity and animacy (see below). You'll learn more about it once you learn about animacy.

In summary:
* When a sentence only has a subject, use **absolutive**
* When a sentence has a subject and an object, the subject is **ergative** and the object is **absolutive**.

Yes, this is very confusing. Don't worry; as you learn more Vecinis, you'll get used to it.

## Animacy
As if ergativity wasn't enough, Vecinis also distinguishes nouns based on **animacy**, or how alive something is. Nouns are usually only animate or inanimate, but some nouns change meanings depending on whether they are treated animately or inanimately.

> This is similar to gender systems like they have in Spanish, Arabic, and a lot of other languages. 

A noun's animacy affects the ergativity suffixes mentioned above, as well as verb conjugations.

In vocabulary lists, animate nouns are listed as **An. Noun** and inanimate nouns are listed as **In. Noun**.

## Those Pesky Suffixes
As you might have noticed, those suffixes have a little tick mark underneath them. This is to remind you that they change their pronunciation depending on what comes before them. Don't worry, it's not too bad:

Suffix|Purpose|After Vowel|After Consonant|After itself
|---|---|---|---|---
|-k̗|Animate Ergative|Vk̗ -> Vk|Ck̗ -> Cik|kk̗ -> k
|-s̗̄|Animate Absolutive|Vs̗̄ -> Vsh|Cs̗̄ -> Cish|s̄s̗̄ -> sh
|-q̗|Inanimate Ergative|Vq̗ -> Vg|Cq̗ -> Coq|qq̗ -> q
|-z̗|Inanimate Absolutive|Vz̗ -> Vz|Cz̗ -> Cuhz|zz̗ -> z

Note that these are not the only suffixes with little tick marks. You'll learn about the others later.

Here's some example sentences. Don't worry about why they mean what they mean right now, but see if you can pick out those suffixes.

* Râs̗̄ kirrimv̗. (I'm cold.)
* Dux dzir̂oq̗ sti dux tabjoz̗. (The pen is at/on the table.)
* Tuk̗ ansivjeri̗ kon pisti apfers̗̄. (You shouldn't eat this apple.)

We'll assemble all these little bits into sentences in the next chapter. For now, look back at those commonly used phrases at the beginning of the page and see if you can start to recognize the suffixes.

## Culture: Vecinik Names
In contrast to Strannic names, where a family keeps a last name and gives each new child a first name, Vecinik names are not based on family much. Vecinik names go `(word) (word) tu (given name)`. Vecinik chilren are named after their mother or father; baby girls are `(Mother's name) (girl) tu (given name)` and baby boys are `(Father's name) (boy) tu (given name)`. As they grow up, they start to pick a new name for themselves. In the North, it's usually based on their profession or apprenticeship, and in the South, it's usually based on their character traits. Their new name becomes official on their 17th birthday.

For example, my name is Kjever Han tu D̄azmin. Translated, this is "Clever Hand Jasmine" or "Jasmine of the Clever Hands," a reflection of my skill with crafts and writing. Because I am from the South, it's my name is a reflection of that character trait. My father, who is from the north, is named Arrib Qebo tu Marrok. Translated, this is "Book Master Malloc" or "Malloc the Bookbinder".

If you want, you can pick your own Vecinik name! But, I would reccomend waiting until you learn some more words.

|[Previous Chapter: Pronunciation](1-Pronunciation.md)|
|---|
